At the moment I am writing this, I would consider making the leap from analyst to engineer one of the greatest milestones of my young career. I wanted to take some time and reflect on this experience so its possible that another young professional may learn from my mistakes on their journey to achieve their goals as well. I've broken this blog up into a few pieces:
- Where I Was, & How I Got Where I Am Today
- Coping With Failure
- Closing Remarks

## Where I Was, & How I Got Where I Am Today
If I were to be entirely honest, it was difficult for me to find a job after college. I had a knack for acing the first round interview, only to expose my goofy self in the latter interviews. I knew I would be successful in any position I got, but convincing others that you're better than all other candidates was something that proved difficult for me to accomplish. I would get myself in great position only for my social anxiety to flare up and I'd fumble the ball in the redzone. After graduating without anything lined up, I decided to move back home and continue to pound job sites looking for _anything_ that might offer some potential. Eventually, I found myself deep in the interview process for two separate positions. I drove the 2-hour trip to Columbus, OH from Cleveland, OH on July 3rd, 2018 for an interview. It was over 100 degrees, and there were heat exhaustion warnings for the region, and I just happened to be driving down in my beat-up 2001 Dodge Dakota, which didn't have air conditioning. Hilariously, I actually drove down in dress shoes, an undershirt, and shorts knowing I'd have to change in a parking lot once I got there so I wouldn't show up covered in a soggy, sweat-soaked suit. I met the folks there, and I was pleasantly surprised with how laid back they all were.

I got a call about a week later, informing me that they were extending an offer. The only thing stopping me from celebrating that elusive offer, was the company had awful - and I mean _despicable_ - reviews on glassdoor.com, had a fairly poor location, and the pay was south of average. Having been booked for final-round interviews at two companies based in Las Vegas, NV I was sort of torn whether I should accept or try to wait it out and see if I could get something better with the clock ticking down. I turned to my father, who is my greatest role model in life. I asked him, "What I should do - accept the offer and deal with any possible regret of what almost was?", to which he responded, "The general rule is you shouldn't take points off the board", which is some logic that can't be argued with, and so I accepted the position that week. I started the next month, on August 6th, 2018.

I found myself in an interesting role. I liked to think of myself as an innovator, but I was in a pretty restricted spot at the start of it all, or at least that's how it felt to me. I picked up creating dashboards pretty quick with the help of my coworker and soon to be friend, Anurag. Soon, It seemed that I could get my job done in about 2-4 hours a day, leaving the rest of the time to really hammer our data warehouse with ridiculous queries for experimental ideas I had to revolutionize how our company looked at attributing payments to outbound communications. I also became a wizard with SQL, because I strictly stuck with writing my logic using SQL. This was because our company had a love affair with SAS products, but I seemed to have an instantaneous, and growing resentment of Base-SAS. Having loathed using SAS from day one, I definitely made my opinions known which certainly resulted in some eye-rolling along the way. Because I couldn't install my own software, I would often nag about using Python or R instead, since I needed a managers approval, but that was proving a lost cause. I can vividly recall a time that a week after my company sent another coworker to a SAS conference in Dallas for free, I spent $450.00 of my own money to go to PyCon US, because it was hosted in Cleveland, OH and I knew I could crash at my parents place! (to be fair: the company got 1 free pass, and it was his _turn_, but the company was too cheap to send multiple people there is the issue I have - talk about supporting personal growth!). I wasn't making much at the time so that expense was fairly significant, and I made the most of it. I went to every possible meeting and even went by the career fair to see what kind of opportunities I could aim for in a 3-5 year span. I was genuinely terrified of meeting new people, but forced myself to go to _every single booth_ and ask how they use python. It was quite the experience - one I wouldn't trade for anything! I really knew I liked data analytics and wanted to stay in that space, but the question was "How on Earth do I convince someone I'm a Data Scientist, or even a Data Engineer?", to which the answer is typically, "more school". But I'm not typical.

Here's the thing, I hated school. I get it, everyone is different. Some people thrive in school and really benefit from it, so take all this with a grain of salt, because I'm about to get a little salty... I think it was the biggest waste of time and money that I could have conceivably made. Maybe it was just my time at Ohio State, where they make it clear you're just a number and give you professors that can't speak English. But, here's the problem from my experience: school doesn't teach _passion_. It beats it out of you like Mike Tyson in a heavyweight boxing match. It irons the fun out of your life, all the while convincing you its worth tens, maybe hundreds of thousands of dollars. There were only 4-6 classes I even thought were worth the price of admission by the end of it. It didn't even help me that much in my job search from my previous experience. I also feel that about 85% of the material I learned there was straight from the internet. They just told me what I needed to google, really. So chalk off "Go get my masters degree" for the next 5-10 years (before I inevitably warm up to making that mistake again). That aside, I had a card up my sleeve. I had pretty much taken the Reporting Analyst position for one reason, because I saw an opportunity in the making. The reason the very position had opened up was because another guy had just gotten another job internally in the data engineering team. I saw that, and knew that if I kept my head down working with the data that I would have my opportunity. Eventually, that opportunity came.

I found myself at the right place at the right time, and had the chance to really take a swing at an opportunity that many dream of - to lead the development of a production system to operate a trained predictive model.To be honest again, I'd use "lead" loosely, because it was really just me frantically trying to put the model our statistician trained into a production system. A lone wolf as they call it. I had been promoted from Reporting Analyst to Analytics Data Engineer on my team, and soon thereafter the team embarked on something none of us knew anything about. From my perspective, the predictive model was the _easy_ part, because every single person on the team had trained a predictive model at some point in their career, on top of having a PhD Statistician on our team to confront the mathematical complications in that arena. Given our situation and our staff, I'll have to admit that I thought the odds of success were much less than that of failure. Once I found out that I had to build an API that could adequately handle the load, matching that currently sent to a very competent vender, I just about threw the white flag up right then and there. It was a pretty hilarious situation looking back at it...

I'd compare it to being thrown out of a plane with nothing but a parachute and the clothes on my back into the Amazon Rain Forest and told to make my way out in less than 3 months. Without a senior engineer, or anyone technical in a senior position above me for that matter, it was tough because I didn't get a lot of guidence. I'll have to admit that my manager was a little bold to encourage me, nonetheless trust me to get the job done. It was an incredible risk, but one that ultimately worked out for the both of us - otherwise there wouldn't be anything to write about! Without having anyone within my little corner of the organization to go to, I tried my best to meet with senior IT employees elsewhere around the organization. They were able to meet periodically and help point me in the right direction from time-to-time, but unfortunately they too had stressful deadlines. I was also a bit of a unicorn, and some of the things I was doing was new to a lot of them as well. This left me out of luck with trying to garner others' expertise, and forced me to turn to the tools I had left in the box: my curiosity, tenacity, and Google.com. I had to become super efficient at reading documentation, trial-and-error, finding my own resources, and failing fast. I had to really get used to digging holes and learning when to put the shovel down. The hardest part was certainly doing that before the hole got too deep - which it did on a few occasions. Pride had to be left at the door, because its about were you finish, not where you start.

Brick-by-brick, I was able to lay a foundation. After hours upon hours of extra work and overtime, I fealt like I was on my way. Looking back, I would definitely say there was a tipping point where things just seemed easier, like I had a grip on what I was doing for once. First, I figured out configurations. Next, the API routing and services. Finally, the database connections and the predictive models. After ~3 long months I had found myself in a unique club, but it wasn't without cost or difficulties along the way. I faced that sink or swim moment, and admittingly, I felt like I sometimes had a 15lb rock weighing me down as waves crashed me every which way. Somehow, I stayed above the water and accomplished my dream.

Where am I now? Well, I'm on a team with many of the same people, but now we're different. We're far more capable. Anurag, who originally trained me with the reporting tools and database structure has also moved to an engineering role to help translate statistical correctness into operational systems. Some new faces have been added, and now I've come to the newest challenge, working as a team. Figuring out who does what, how things get done, and of course living with the impending sense of doom from the never-ending pile of technical debt accumulating while I beg business people to gut the product road map. Learning how to build systems with others involved has been great - far less stressful and much more specialized. Like a stone mason and a carpenter build a house, there are things people like to do, and do very well. I've learned that listening to one another and valuing everyone's input is key to success. So is writing clean code that others can readily follow along on and maintain. Its a great follow-up to the earlier trials because it is preparing me for the future. One time while I was an intern at Vizion Solutions (now Vizion360), working on Power BI as an intern-consultant I was taken onsite and the CTO of the company randomly stopped me and told me, "Always remember this: People. Process, Technology. P-P-T.", and I sometimes think back to that. Its important to remember that its about the people you work with, the people you serve, and generally all the stakeholders affected. People matter the most, followed by the process you're trying to fit. If the tech can't adjust to those then you're using the wrong tech. That can be a guiding principle of teamwork, and one that I believe can help us have continued success.

One moment stuck out to me during this whole phase though, and that was the moment when I realized, *I'm getting paid to code*. That was a pretty cool moment for me, having done so much extracurricular work to convince myself and others that I could get the job done. 


## Coping With Failure
There were _a lot_ of times I didn't get something right the first time around. As I write this, I'd chalk up the project as a whole as a success, but there were certainly times things didn't go as planned. In retrospect, I'd say the perserverence can be attributed to staying calm in the face of adversity and incredible stress. I failed on so many things that its hard to recount a particular time, but a few things pop out at me today:

- It took me about 2-4 weeks to fully understand how configurations & secrets worked.
- I'm guessing it took me around 150-250 docker builds to finally "get it". Not really sure, but it was _a lot_.
- I already re-built the entire API.

During the project, I had so much pressure on me that I had developed some sort of anxiety-driven issue where I started to struggle with breathing (and I'm not talking about the coronavirus). I'd describe it as a sort of shortness of breathe where it feels like you need to yawn, or like you just can't get a full breath, you might understand how that affects your day-to-day life. I bring this up, because I want to fully illustrate that it wasn't all mountain tops and daisies. It was hard work... challenging both my mind and my sanity. My desire for success had pushed me past yesterday's qualifying race and into the main heats, where the pressure dissipated in a sort of apathy coupled with thick skin I grew through the failures. It now comes and goes with the continued stress thanks to the constant, maddening drum beat of tech-debt and upstream decisions made by folks who may or may not fully understand how subtle intricacies affect my ability to get things done.

I've learned the best defense to letting others place stress on you is to simply put yourself first. I've found the book, "First Things First", by Steven Covey covers many key strategies to copping with this sort of situation. Another important thing is to always look out for burnout amoung your teamates, because eventually everyone is going to feel the touch of burnout, because eventually _it just gets old_. Apathy sets in and you just don't feel that same pep that was once there. Managing that within yourself first is key, but always pay attention to your peers, your team, and even your bosses. Awareness means everything becuase without first being aware, you cannot act to fix things. The better mental state you and your teammates are in, the more effective and successful you will be. Ignore the little things and focus on what matters, the people... and that includes yourself.

Just remember nothing is worth more than your happiness, your health, and those you love. Not data science, not money, and certainly not organizational clout. I'll admit that while I am super passionate about data science and my work, one of the reasons I worked so hard was that I simply didn't have anything _better_ to do with my time. I simply ranked, and still do rank, continuous learning in my top 5 things in life. I'm somewhat thankful for that, because its gotten me where I am today. I just want to stress that its important to keep all your first things first. Yes, you can get there through hard work, but don't sacrifice anything you would regret. It's important to consider this all before diving in, because there are "sink or swim" moments, and if you want to swim you need to assure that you are proactive enough that you can conquer the challenges regardless of the circumstances. Whether that's being a lone wolf like I was, or if you would thrive more in a structured team following more educational qualification then you know that's the route for you - and there's nothing wrong with that. Everyone learns differently, and its important to fully understand yourself before attempting to understand any data.

There are generally 2 quotes I like to think about in a time of failure or crisis that make me feel better about my situation:
- "Chill out, we're all literally just floating through space."
- Regarding that time the freighter, Ever Given was stuck in the Suez Canal & blocking $9 billion of global trade each day it remained stuck. In the midst of that, I saw someone tweet, "After this Ever Given nonsense, I don't think anyone will be able to convince me that it can't wait until tomorrow."

## Closing Remarks
If I were to sum it all into one word, I'd choose **[aplomb](https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/aplomb#)**. Aplomb, defined as _complete and confident composure or self-assurance_, is important because you will inevitably be challenged when making the jump from an analyst role to an engineering role. Make no mistake, you _will_ be tested, whether that challenge comes from people, code, or cloud architecture doesn't matter; all that matters is how you respond to that challenge, especially so in situations like the one I found myself in. You must always remember that _you_ have the ability to make a choice about how you respond. 

I may not have the typical expensive educational background and natural genius that many of my peers in the data science and analytics field have, but somehow I've found myself in the "deployed-a-predictive-model-and-helped-a-company-make-money-off-it-club". Without those academic allocades supporting how others percieve my intellect, I've found that my success has largely been thanks to my passion, curiosity, discipline, proactiveness, and persistance. Well, at least thats what I'd put on a public website. If I were hanging out with a friend, I'd probably just say, "I don't think anyone really _knows_ what theyre doing. We just figure it out after enough trail-and-error".

You're going to have set backs. You're going to fail. You're going to be working longer than others to get the same job done... and thats _okay_. With time and effort, anything is possible!

